# Requirements #

* [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org/)
* [Lame Encoder](http://manual.audacityteam.org/man/faq_installation_and_plug_ins.html#How_do_I_download_and_install_the_LAME_MP3_encoder.3F)
* [Libre Office](https://www.libreoffice.org/)

# How to Record Sounds #

See
[Splitting a recording for export as separate tracks](https://manual.audacityteam.org/man/splitting_a_recording_into_separate_tracks.html) for
more information.

## Prepare ##

Open the `Words.ods` file and scroll the correct section you will be recording.

Unfortunately Audacity doesn't allow single export if only one word needs to be
tweaked in the instructions to follow. So don't do too many words at one time, a
manageable number like 20 should be fine. If you do more, then the export will
take a little longer as it overwrites all the files but the exporting is still
quick.

## Record the words ##

Start Audacity.

Click `Record (R)`.

Speak a work clearly and with emotion (that is, not like a bored robot).

Wait approximately 2 seconds between each work as Sound Finder will use a
minimum duration of 1 second to automatically split the words up, and repeat
speaking words until you have completed the list you want to record.

Click `Stop`.

Save the project as `<word index from> - <word index to>.aup`, for example
`1-20.aup`.

## Label each word in the recording ##

### Create the labels by using Sound Finder ###

See [Sound Finder](http://manual.audacityteam.org/man/sound_finder.html) for
more information.

Select the entire audio recording, `Select > All (Ctrl+A)`.

Run the Sound Finder, `Analyze > Sound Finder...`.

The defaults for Sound Finder are mostly fine, but the starting/ending points
need a little tweak so they don't sound clipped as `0.100` feels too short.

Change `Label starting point` and `Label ending point` to be `0.200`.

Click `OK`.

This will create a Label track numbered from 1 to the
number of words spoken.

Adjust the end word's ending as it looks like Sound Finder just extends all the
way to the end of the file. In the label track click the angle looking area at
the end of the range (its just to the left of the round dot) and drag it to a
suitable end position.

### Export the labels ###

Export the labels, `File > Export > Export Labels...` and save the file in the
project directory as `<word index from> - <word index to>.txt`, for example
`1-20.txt`. See
the
[label file format](http://manual.audacityteam.org/man/importing_and_exporting_labels.html) for
more information. The last column is the label.

### Edit the labels ###

Open the label file in Libre Office Calc.

From `Words.ods` copy the words you spoke and paste them over the autogenerated
labels in `1-20.txt`.

Save the file (making sure to enable tab separators) `File > Save As`, enable
`Edit filter settings`, change `Save as type` to `Text CSV (.csv) (*.csv)`,
click `Save`. In the `Export Text File` popup, changed `Field delimiter` to
`{Tab}`, the other defaults are fine, click `OK`.

### Import the labels ###

In Audacity, import the labels, `File > Import > Labels...` and select the
`1-20.csv` files (you may need to change `Files of type` to `All files`).

This will create a new label track with the words.

Delete the Sound Finder label track by clicking the `X` in the top left corner
of the label track.

## Maximize the volume of the recording ##

Select the entire audio recording,  `Select > All (Ctrl+A)`.

Normalize the volume, `Effect > Normalize...`. The defaults are fine. Click `OK`.

## Save the words into separate tracks ##

### Setup the Metadata ###

Edit the metadata, `Edit > Metadata...`

In the `Edit metadata Tags` dialog set:
* `Artist Name` to speaker's name
* `Comments` to `https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/`

***TODO*** Work out whether setting Album name for separate lists is necessary.

Click `OK`.

### Enable silent export ###

Open the preferences dialog `Edit > Preferences...` in the `Inport/Export` tab
disable `Show Metadata Tags editor before export`.

Click `OK`.

### Save the tracks ###

Save the words into sepratate tracks, `File > Save Other > Export Multiple... (Ctrl+Shift+L)`.

Change the `Folder` location to the `audio\draft` directory of the
Words workspace.

Change the `Format` to `MP3 Files`.

In the `Split files based on:` section ensure `Labels` is enabled and `Include
audiot before first label` is disabled.

In the `Name files:` section ensure `Using Label/Track Name` is enabled.

Export the files, click `Export`.

You will need to click `OK` for each file being saved as it presents the
Metadata for each file.

**WARNING** You must have already installed a `Lame encoder` as per the
requirements.

**TODO** Work out whether setting track number is a possibility.

## Validate the sound files ##

In an audio program, for example Windows Media Player, listen to all the sounds
to make sure they sound fine.

Remember the note from the Preparation step, if only one file needs to be tweaks
you will need to manually adjust the label's length and re-export all the files.
So make sure you validate all the files exported again.

## Move the draft files into the audio\<speaker's name> folder ##

Once you are happy with the words move them from the `audio\draft` folder into
`audio\<speaker's name>` folder.

## Cleanup ##

Delete the
* Audacity project file `.aup`
* Label track files `.txt` and `.csv`

## Commit the new files ##
